Testing tool split input (#2881)
confluentinc/ksql: docs/testing-tool.rst

.. code:: bash

    NAME
            ksql-test-runner - The KSQL testing tool

    SYNOPSIS
            ksql-test-runner {--input-file | -i} <inputFile>
                    {--output-file | -o} <outputFile>
                    {--sql-file | -s} <statementsFile>

    OPTIONS
            --input-file <inputFile>, -i <inputFile>
                A JSON file containing the input records.

                This option may occur a maximum of 1 time

            --output-file <outputFile>, -o <outputFile>
                A JSON file containing the expected output records.

                This option may occur a maximum of 1 time

            --sql-file <statementsFile>, -s <statementsFile>
                A SQL file containing KSQL statements to be tested.

                This option may occur a maximum of 1 time

Test File Structure
*******************

Statements File
---------------

The statements file contains the KSQL statements to test. The following are the supported statements in the testing tool:

- CREATE STREAM
- CREATE TABLE
- CREATE STREAM AS SELECT
- CREATE TABLE AS SELECT
- INSERT INTO SELECT

Here is a sample statements file for the testing tool:

.. code:: sql

>     CREATE STREAM SRTREAM1 (ID bigint, NAME varchar, VALUE double) WITH (kafka_topic='test_topic', value_format='DELIMITED', key='ID');

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    CREATE STREAM STREAM1 (ID bigint, NAME varchar, VALUE double) WITH (kafka_topic='test_topic', value_format='DELIMITED', key='ID');
```
nit: spelling. Same comment for the line below. (Updating this also requires updating the example inputs and outputs.)

Author: Ah, how did I miss this?!!!! Fixed it :)

    CREATE STREAM SRTREAM2 as SELECT name FROM SRTREAM1 WHERE id > 100;

Input File
----------

The input file is a JSON file with one array field named "inputs". Each element in the array is the representation of input messages.
A message should have a topic, a key, a value and a timestamp. The following is a sample input file for the above test:

.. code:: json
    {
      "inputs": [
        {"topic": "test_topic", "key": 0, "value": "0,zero,0.0"},

>         {"topic": "test_topic", "key": 100, "value": "100,100,0.0"},

Reviewer: nit: I was confused by this example at first since at first glance it looks like the types don't match. Turns out it works because the mismatched column is of type `VARCHAR`, but it'd probably be better to update the example to avoid this confusion.

Author: Yes, since it's Delimited format it takes care of casting. I changed the example to JSON so it would remove any confusions!

        {"topic": "test_topic", "key": 101, "value": "101,101,0.0"}
      ]
    }

Output File
----------

The output file is a JSON file with an array field named "outputs". Similar to the input file, each element in the array is the representation of the expected output messages.
An expected output message should have a topic, a key, a value and a timestamp. The following is a sample expected output file for the above test:

.. code:: json
     {
       "outputs": [
               {"topic": "SRTREAM1", "key": 101, "value": "101"}
       ]
     }

> In the output output files you can have messages with windowed keys. Such messages can be generated by windowed aggretations in KSQL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the output files you can have messages with windowed keys. Such messages can be generated by windowed aggretations in KSQL.
```

The following is an example expected output file with records that have a window field:

.. code:: json
     {
        "outputs": [
          {"topic": "S2", "key": 0, "value": "0,0", "timestamp": 0, "window": {"start": 0, "end": 30000, "type": "time"}},
          {"topic": "S2", "key": 0, "value": "0,5", "timestamp": 10000, "window": {"start": 0, "end": 30000, "type": "time"}},
          {"topic": "S2", "key": 100, "value": "100,100", "timestamp": 30000, "window": {"start": 30000, "end": 60000, "type": "time"}},
          {"topic": "S2", "key": 100, "value": "100,100", "timestamp": 45000, "window": {"start": 30000, "end": 60000, "type": "time"}}
        ]
     }

Currently, in the input files you can only have record with session window types.

The testing tool will indicate the success or failure of a test by printing the corresponding message. The following is the result of a successful test:

.. code:: bash
    ksql-test-runner -s statements.sql -i input.json -o output.json
     Test passed!

If a test fails, the testing tool will indicate the failure along with the cause. Here is an example of the output for a failing test:

.. code:: bash

>     ksql-test-runner -s statements.sql -i input.json -o output.json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ksql-test-runner -s statements_bad.sql -i input_bad.json -o output_bad.json
```
To avoid confusion where someone not reading carefully might expect the above example to fail.

is a command line utility that enables testing KSQL statements without requiring any infrastructure, like |ak-tm| and KSQL clusters.
The KSQL testing tool is a great way to design your KSQL pipeline and ensure the expected results are generated.
You can collaborate on designing your KSQL statements by sharing the test files.
To test a set of KSQL statements, you provide three files, one file containing the KSQL statements and two JSON files containing the input records and the expected output records.

.. code:: bash

    NAME
            ksql-test-runner - The KSQL testing tool

    SYNOPSIS
            ksql-test-runner {--input-file | -i} <inputFile>
                    {--output-file | -o} <outputFile>
                    {--sql-file | -s} <statementsFile>

    OPTIONS
            --input-file <inputFile>, -i <inputFile>
                A JSON file containing the input records.

>                 This option may occur a maximum of 1 times

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                This option may occur a maximum of 1 time
```

Author: Interesting, that's the message that is generated automatically by the airline package. I updated it in the docs anyway.

            --output-file <outputFile>, -o <outputFile>
                A JSON file containing the expected output records.

>                 This option may occur a maximum of 1 times

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                This option may occur a maximum of 1 time
```

            --sql-file <statementsFile>, -s <statementsFile>
                A SQL file containing KSQL statements to be tested.

>                 This option may occur a maximum of 1 times

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                This option may occur a maximum of 1 time
```

Test File Structure
*******************

Statements File
---------------

> The statements file contain the KSQL statements that will be tested. The following are the supported statements in the testing tool:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The statements file contains the KSQL statements to test. The following are the supported statements in the testing tool:
```

- CREATE STREAM
- CREATE TABLE
- CREATE STREAM AS SELECT
- CREATE TABLE AS SELECT
- INSERT INTO SELECT

> Here is a sample statements file for testing tool:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here is a sample statements file for the testing tool:
```

.. code:: sql

>     CREATE STREAM TEST (ID bigint, NAME varchar, VALUE bigint) WITH (kafka_topic='left_topic', value_format='JSON', key='ID');

Author: Simplified the example and updated the names as you suggested!

    CREATE STREAM TEST_STREAM (ID bigint, F1 varchar, F2 bigint) WITH (kafka_topic='right_topic', value_format='JSON', key='ID');
    CREATE STREAM LEFT_OUTER_JOIN as SELECT t.id, name, value, f1, f2 FROM test t left join TEST_STREAM tt WITHIN 11 seconds ON t.id = tt.id;
    CREATE STREAM foo AS SELECT t_id, name FROM LEFT_OUTER_JOIN WHERE t_id = 90;
    CREATE STREAM bar AS SELECT * FROM foo;

Input File
----------

The input file is a JSON file with one array field named "inputs". Each element in the array is the representation of input messages.

> A message should have topic, key, value and timestamp. The following is a sample input file for the above test:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A message should have a topic, a key, a value, and a timestamp. The following is a sample input file for the above test:
```

.. code:: json
    {

>       "inputs": [

Reviewer: Do we need to wrap the inputs and outputs in JSON objects like this, now that each gets its own dedicated file? It feels odd that we currently require inputs and outputs to be wrapped, while the statements file shouldn't be.

If we chose to unwrap the inputs and outputs, that would also address @agavra 's nit about `InputRecordsNode.java` and `OutputRecordsNode.java` being identical minus a name.

Author: This indeed came up in my discussion with MD too. The reason we wrap them in a JSON object is to have the possibility to add more fields in future.

        {"topic": "left_topic", "key": 0, "value": {"ID": 0, "NAME": "zero", "VALUE": 0}, "timestamp": 0},
        {"topic": "right_topic", "key": 0, "value": {"ID": 0, "F1": "blah", "F2": 50}, "timestamp": 10000},
        {"topic": "left_topic", "key": 10, "value": {"ID": 10, "NAME": "100", "VALUE": 5}, "timestamp": 11000},
        {"topic": "left_topic", "key": 0, "value": {"ID": 0, "NAME": "foo", "VALUE": 100}, "timestamp": 13000},
        {"topic": "right_topic", "key": 0, "value": {"ID": 0, "F1": "a", "F2": 10}, "timestamp": 15000},
        {"topic": "right_topic", "key": 100, "value": {"ID": 100, "F1": "newblah", "F2": 150}, "timestamp": 16000},
        {"topic": "left_topic", "key": 90, "value": {"ID": 90, "NAME": "ninety", "VALUE": 90}, "timestamp": 17000},
        {"topic": "left_topic", "key": 0, "value": {"ID": 0, "NAME": "bar", "VALUE": 99}, "timestamp": 30000}
      ]
    }

Output File
----------

> The output file is a JSON file with an array field names "outputs". Similar to the input file, each element in the array is the representation of the expected output messages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The output file is a JSON file with an array field named "outputs". Similar to the input file, each element in the array is the representation of the expected output messages.
```

> An expected output message should have topic, key, value and timestamp. The following is a sample exected output file for the above test:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An expected output message should have a topic, a key, a value, and a timestamp. The following is a sample expected output file for the above test:
```

         {"topic": "LEFT_OUTER_JOIN", "key": 0, "value": {"T_ID": 0, "NAME": "zero", "VALUE": 0, "F1": "blah", "F2": 50}, "timestamp": 10000},
         {"topic": "LEFT_OUTER_JOIN", "key": 10, "value": {"T_ID": 10, "NAME": "100", "VALUE": 5, "F1": null, "F2": null}, "timestamp": 11000},
         {"topic": "LEFT_OUTER_JOIN", "key": 0, "value": {"T_ID": 0, "NAME": "foo", "VALUE": 100, "F1": "blah", "F2": 50}, "timestamp": 13000},
         {"topic": "LEFT_OUTER_JOIN", "key": 0, "value": {"T_ID": 0, "NAME": "foo", "VALUE": 100, "F1": "a", "F2": 10}, "timestamp": 15000},
         {"topic": "LEFT_OUTER_JOIN", "key": 90, "value": {"T_ID": 90, "NAME": "ninety", "VALUE": 90, "F1": null, "F2": null}, "timestamp": 17000},
         {"topic": "LEFT_OUTER_JOIN", "key": 0, "value": {"T_ID": 0, "NAME": "bar", "VALUE": 99, "F1": null, "F2": null}, "timestamp": 30000},
         {"topic": "FOO", "key": 90, "value": {"T_ID": 90, "NAME": "ninety"}, "timestamp": 17000},
         {"topic": "BAR", "key": 90, "value": {"T_ID": 90, "NAME": "ninety"}, "timestamp": 17000}
       ]

>      }

Reviewer: What happened to the expectedException functionality that existed in previous versions of this tool? I think it's useful for users to be able to specify expected exceptions and verify that they are indeed thrown.

Author: Now that we have input/output rows, we don't have the expected exceptions feature. We can add this in future iterations as I mentioned above since we wrap the input and output in a JSON object.

> In either of input or output files you can have messages with windowed keys. Such messages can be generated by windowed aggretations in KSQL.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
you can have messages with windowed keys in both the input and output files. Such messages can be generated by windowed aggregations in KSQL.
```

> In either of input or output files you can have messages with windowed keys. Such messages can be generated by windowed aggretations in KSQL.

Author: It works for session windows but not for time windows. I updated the docs to mention this.

> To specify a window for a message you can add "window" field to the message. A window field has three fields:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To specify a window for a message you can add a "window" field to the message. A window field has three fields:
```

> - start: this represents the start time for the window.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- start: the start time for the window.
```

> - end: this represents the end time for the windoe.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- end: the end time for the window.
```

> - type: this represents the type of the window. A window type can be time or session.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- type: the type of the window. A window type can be ``time`` or ``session``.
```

> The following is a sample expecte output file with records that have window field:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following is an example expected output file with records that have a window field:
```

.. code:: json
     {
        "outputs": [
          {"topic": "S2", "key": 0, "value": "0,0", "timestamp": 0, "window": {"start": 0, "end": 30000, "type": "time"}},
          {"topic": "S2", "key": 0, "value": "0,5", "timestamp": 10000, "window": {"start": 0, "end": 30000, "type": "time"}},
          {"topic": "S2", "key": 100, "value": "100,100", "timestamp": 30000, "window": {"start": 30000, "end": 60000, "type": "time"}},
          {"topic": "S2", "key": 100, "value": "100,100", "timestamp": 45000, "window": {"start": 30000, "end": 60000, "type": "time"}},
          {"topic": "S2", "key": 100, "value": "100,300", "timestamp": 50000, "window": {"start": 30000, "end": 60000, "type": "time"}},
          {"topic": "S2", "key": 0, "value": "0,100", "timestamp": 35000, "window": {"start": 30000, "end": 60000, "type": "time"}},
          {"topic": "S2", "key": 0, "value": "0,2000", "timestamp": 40000, "window": {"start": 30000, "end": 60000, "type": "time"}}
        ]
     }

> 

Author: The result is much simpler now that we just run one test. I added examples of the output to the docs.
